README.md, before:

[![Community Extension](https://img.shields.io/badge/Community%20Extension-An%20open%20source%20community%20maintained%20project-FF4700)](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/community)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lifecycle-Proof%20of%20Concept-blueviolet)](https://github.com/Camunda-Community-Hub/community/blob/main/extension-lifecycle.md#proof-of-concept-)
![Compatible with: Camunda Platform 8](https://img.shields.io/badge/Compatible%20with-Camunda%20Platform%208-0072Ce)

# Camunda 8 JDBC Connector

!!! Work in progress, use at your own risk !!!

A Camunda 8 Connector capable of connecting to Databases via JDBC and running SQL commands.

# Configure Desktop Modeler

Download the the element template ([jdbc-connector.json](element-templates/jdbc-connector.json)) and [follow these steps](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/configuring-templates/) to use it with your local Desktop Modeler.

After you have configured the element template, restart Desktop Modeler and try adding a new Service Task. Click the blue `Select` button under the `Template` section in the properties panel and then choose the `JDBC Connector` Template. 

![Choose Template](images/ChooseTemplate.png "Choose Template")

# JDBC Url and Connection Pooling

The JDBC url must point to a valid database server. 

This connector uses the [HikariCP library](https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP) for connection pooling.

A separate Connection Pool will be created for each unique combination of `Jdbc Url` + `Username` + `Password`. 

This example uses the same JDBC configuration (`jdbc:h2:mem:camunda` + `sa` + `password`) for several JDBC Connector Tasks. Therefore, the same Connection Pool is used for all JDBC Connector Tasks.

The `Password` field supports [Connector Secrets](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/connectors/custom-built-connectors/connector-sdk/#secrets).

![JDBC Config](images/JDBCConfig.png "JDBC Config")

If an additional JDBC Connector Task was added with a different `Jdbc Url`, or a different `Username`/`Password`, then a separate Connection Pool will be created and used for instances arriving at this new Task.  

# Query for single result

Choose the `SELECT and return single record` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. The following is an example of selecting a single record from a `USERS` table. 

![SELECT single result](./images/SELECTSingleResult.png "SELECT Single Result")

The result is a single Map Data Structure: 

![SELECT single result variables](images/SELECTSingleResultVariables.png "SELECT Single Result Variables")

## Query for List of results

Choose the `SELECT and return list of records` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. The following is an example of querying for a list of records from a `USERS` table.

![SELECT List](images/SELECTList.png)

The result is a list of Map Objects: 

![SELECT List Variables](images/SELECTListVariables.png)

## Query and return a Map

Choose the `SELECT and return Map` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. 

Instead of returning results as a List, this option returns them as a Map. The trick here is to define which column to use as the Map Key. In this example, we define the `Map Key Column Name` as `EMAIL`. This way, the results are indexed using the value from the `USERS.EMAIL` column. 

![SELECT Map](images/SELECTMap.png)

Here's the result, notice that the results of the query are indexed by email: 

![SELECT Map Variables](images/SELECTMapVariables.png)

## INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE

Choose either `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. The following is an example of inserting a record into the `USERS` table.

![INSERT](images/INSERT.png)

Here's the result: 

![INSERT Variables](images/INSERTVariables.png)

`UPDATE`, and `DELETE` work the same as `INSERT`

## Supported Database Types

As of now, this project supports the following database drivers. Additional database types can be added easily by adding a new dependency to the pom.xml.

- [H2](src/main/java/io/camunda/connector/db/H2Database.java)
- [Postgresql](src/main/java/io/camunda/connector/db/PostgresDatabase.java)

# TODO / Next steps

- Implement prepared statements by passing json map structure as params
- real world test against postgresql
- add support for mysql and test
- add support for sqlserver and test
- Implement options for connection pooling?
- Create separate element templates for each type of db?
- will also need separate JDBCParam classes for each type of db?

## Build

You can package the Connector by running the following command:

```bash
mvn clean package
```

This will create the following artifacts:

- A thin JAR without dependencies.
- An uber JAR containing all dependencies, potentially shaded to avoid classpath conflicts. This will not include the SDK artifacts since those are in scope `provided` and will be brought along by the respective Connector Runtime executing the Connector.

### Shading dependencies

You can use the `maven-shade-plugin` defined in the [Maven configuration](./pom.xml) to relocate common dependencies
that are used in other Connectors and the [Connector Runtime](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/spring-zeebe/tree/master/connector-runtime#building-connector-runtime-bundles).
This helps avoiding classpath conflicts when the Connector is executed. 

Use the `relocations` configuration in the Maven Shade plugin to define the dependencies that should be shaded.
The [Maven Shade documentation](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-shade-plugin/examples/class-relocation.html) 
provides more details on relocations.

## API

### Input

```json
{
  "token": ".....",
  "message": "....."
}
```

### Output

```json
{
  "result": {
    "myProperty": "....."
  }
}
```

### Error codes

| Code | Description |
| - | - |
| FAIL | Message starts with 'fail' (ignoring case) |

## Test locally

Run unit tests

```bash
mvn clean verify
```

### Test with local runtime

Use the [Camunda Connector Runtime](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/spring-zeebe/tree/master/connector-runtime#building-connector-runtime-bundles) to run your function as a local Java application.

In your IDE you can also simply navigate to the `LocalContainerRuntime` class in test scope and run it via your IDE.
If necessary, you can adjust `application.properties` in test scope.

### H2 Console

The `LocalContainerRuntime` spring boot application is configured to create a H2 Database Schema and insert some records. 

The H2 console can be accessed here: [http://localhost:9898/h2-console](http://localhost:9898/h2-console)

## Element Template

The element templates can be found in the [element-templates/template-connector.json](element-templates/jdbc-connector.json) file.

Commit message:

Now able to define `?` placeholders in sql and provide param map

README.md, after:

[![Community Extension](https://img.shields.io/badge/Community%20Extension-An%20open%20source%20community%20maintained%20project-FF4700)](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/community)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lifecycle-Proof%20of%20Concept-blueviolet)](https://github.com/Camunda-Community-Hub/community/blob/main/extension-lifecycle.md#proof-of-concept-)
![Compatible with: Camunda Platform 8](https://img.shields.io/badge/Compatible%20with-Camunda%20Platform%208-0072Ce)

# Camunda 8 JDBC Connector

!!! Work in progress, use at your own risk !!!

A Camunda 8 Connector capable of connecting to Databases via JDBC and running SQL commands.

# Configure Desktop Modeler

Download the the element template ([jdbc-connector.json](element-templates/jdbc-connector.json)) and [follow these steps](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/modeler/desktop-modeler/element-templates/configuring-templates/) to use it with your local Desktop Modeler.

After you have configured the element template, restart Desktop Modeler and try adding a new Service Task. Click the blue `Select` button under the `Template` section in the properties panel and then choose the `JDBC Connector` Template. 

![Choose Template](images/ChooseTemplate.png "Choose Template")

# JDBC Url and Connection Pooling

The JDBC url must point to a valid database server. 

This connector uses the [HikariCP library](https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP) for connection pooling.

A separate Connection Pool will be created for each unique combination of `Jdbc Url` + `Username` + `Password`. 

This example uses the same JDBC configuration (`jdbc:h2:mem:camunda` + `sa` + `password`) for several JDBC Connector Tasks. Therefore, the same Connection Pool is used for all JDBC Connector Tasks.

The `Password` field supports [Connector Secrets](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/connectors/custom-built-connectors/connector-sdk/#secrets).

![JDBC Config](images/JDBCConfig.png "JDBC Config")

If an additional JDBC Connector Task was added with a different `Jdbc Url`, or a different `Username`/`Password`, then a separate Connection Pool will be created and used for instances arriving at this new Task.  

# Placeholders in sql

If useful, `?` placeholders can be used inside sql statements. For example: 

```java
SELECT * from USERS where email = ? and firstName = ?
```

This statement contains two `?` placeholders. This means that we need to provide a `Placeholder parameter Map` with 2 entries. For example: 

```json
{
  "1": "user1@email.com", 
  "2": "dave"
}
```

Here's what it would look like in Modeler: 

![Placeholders Example 1](images/PlaceholdersExample1.png)

Note that it's possible to use FEEL expressions within the Placeholder Map! 

# Query for single result

Choose the `SELECT and return single record` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. 

The following is an example of selecting a single record from a `USERS` table. 

![SELECT single result](./images/SELECTSingleResult.png "SELECT Single Result")

The result is a single Map Data Structure: 

![SELECT single result variables](images/SELECTSingleResultVariables.png "SELECT Single Result Variables")

## Query for List of results

Choose the `SELECT and return list of records` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. The following is an example of querying for a list of records from a `USERS` table.

![SELECT List](images/SELECTList.png)

The result is a list of Map Objects: 

![SELECT List Variables](images/SELECTListVariables.png)

## Query and return a Map

Choose the `SELECT and return Map` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. 

Instead of returning results as a List, this option returns them as a Map. The trick here is to define which column to use as the Map Key. In this example, we define the `Map Key Column Name` as `EMAIL`. This way, the results are indexed using the value from the `USERS.EMAIL` column. 

![SELECT Map](images/SELECTMap.png)

Here's the result, notice that the results of the query are indexed by email: 

![SELECT Map Variables](images/SELECTMapVariables.png)

## INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE

Choose either `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE` option under the `SQL Command` properties panel. The following is an example of inserting a record into the `USERS` table.

![INSERT](images/INSERT.png)

Here's the result: 

![INSERT Variables](images/INSERTVariables.png)

`UPDATE`, and `DELETE` work the same as `INSERT`

## Supported Database Types

As of now, this project supports the following database drivers. Additional database types can be added easily by adding a new dependency to the pom.xml.

- [H2](src/main/java/io/camunda/connector/db/H2Database.java)
- [Postgresql](src/main/java/io/camunda/connector/db/PostgresDatabase.java)

# TODO / Next steps

- Implement prepared statements by passing json map structure as params
- real world test against postgresql
- add support for mysql and test
- add support for sqlserver and test
- Implement options for connection pooling?
- Create separate element templates for each type of db?
- will also need separate JDBCParam classes for each type of db?

## Build

You can package the Connector by running the following command:

```bash
mvn clean package
```

This will create the following artifacts:

- A thin JAR without dependencies.
- An uber JAR containing all dependencies, potentially shaded to avoid classpath conflicts. This will not include the SDK artifacts since those are in scope `provided` and will be brought along by the respective Connector Runtime executing the Connector.

### Shading dependencies

You can use the `maven-shade-plugin` defined in the [Maven configuration](./pom.xml) to relocate common dependencies
that are used in other Connectors and the [Connector Runtime](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/spring-zeebe/tree/master/connector-runtime#building-connector-runtime-bundles).
This helps avoiding classpath conflicts when the Connector is executed. 

Use the `relocations` configuration in the Maven Shade plugin to define the dependencies that should be shaded.
The [Maven Shade documentation](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-shade-plugin/examples/class-relocation.html) 
provides more details on relocations.

## API

### Input

```json
{
  "token": ".....",
  "message": "....."
}
```

### Output

```json
{
  "result": {
    "myProperty": "....."
  }
}
```

### Error codes

| Code | Description |
| - | - |
| FAIL | Message starts with 'fail' (ignoring case) |

## Test locally

Run unit tests

```bash
mvn clean verify
```

### Test with local runtime

Use the [Camunda Connector Runtime](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub/spring-zeebe/tree/master/connector-runtime#building-connector-runtime-bundles) to run your function as a local Java application.

In your IDE you can also simply navigate to the `LocalContainerRuntime` class in test scope and run it via your IDE.
If necessary, you can adjust `application.properties` in test scope.

### H2 Console

The `LocalContainerRuntime` spring boot application is configured to create a H2 Database Schema and insert some records. 

The H2 console can be accessed here: [http://localhost:9898/h2-console](http://localhost:9898/h2-console)

## Element Template

The element templates can be found in the [element-templates/template-connector.json](element-templates/jdbc-connector.json) file.
